`dapr run -f` docs (#3093)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/developing-applications/local-development/multi-app-dapr-run/multi-app-overview.md

---
type: docs

> title: Multi-app Run overview

Reviewer: nitpick 
```suggestion
title: Multi-App Run overview
```

linkTitle: Multi-App Run overview
weight: 1000

> description: Learn the scenarios around running multiple applications with one CLI command

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Run multiple applications with one CLI command
```

> description: Learn the scenarios around running multiple applications with one Dapr command

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Learn the scenarios around running multiple applications with one CLI command
```

---

{{% alert title="Note" color="primary" %}}
 Multi-app `dapr run -f` is currently a preview feature only supported in Linux/MacOS. 
{{% /alert %}}

Let's say you want to run several applications locally to test them together, similar to a production scenario. With a local Kubernetes cluster, you'd be able to do this with helm/deployment YAML files. You'd also have to build them as containers and set up Kubernetes, which can add some complexity. 

Instead, you simply want to run them as local executables in self-hosted mode.  However, self-hosted mode requires you to:

- Run multiple `dapr run` commands

> - Keep track of all ports opened (you cannot have duplicate ports for different applications)- Remember the resources folders and configuration files that each application refers to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Keep track of all ports opened (you cannot have duplicate ports for different applications).
- Remember the resources folders and configuration files that each application refers to.
```

- Recall all of the additional flags you used to tweak the `dapr run` command behavior (`--app-health-check-path`, `--dapr-grpc-port`, `--unix-domain-socket`, etc.)

> With Multi-app Run, you can easily start multiple applications in self-hosted mode using a single `dapr run -f` command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Multi-app Run, you can start multiple applications in self-hosted mode using a single `dapr run -f` command using a template file. The template file describes how to start multiple applications as if you had run many separate CLI `run`commands. By default, this template file is called `dapr.yaml`. 
```

> ## Multi-app Run template file

Reviewer 2: I have a name!! 
How about "MapR, pronounced "mapper". Goes with Dapr and stands for "Multi-app Run"!!

> With Multi-app Run, you can start multiple applications in self-hosted mode using a single `dapr run -f` command using a template file. The template file describes how to start multiple applications as if you had run many separate CLI `run`commands. By default, this template file is called `dapr.yaml`. 

Reviewer: should it be `Multi-App` or `Multi-app`? I think we should be consistent across the doc.

Author: thanks for catching - I'll go with Multi-App

> When you execute `dapr run -f`, Dapr parses the multi-app template file initialized with `dapr init`. By default, this template file is called `dapr.yaml`. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you execute `dapr run -f`, uses the multi-app template file to run all the applications.
```

> You can customize the template file by executing `dapr run -f ./<your-preferred-file-name>.yaml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can name template file with preferred name other than the default. For example `dapr run -f ./<your-preferred-file-name>.yaml`.
```

> When you execute `dapr run -f`, uses the multi-app template file to run all the applications. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you execute `dapr run -f .`, it uses the multi-app template file (named `dapr.yaml`) present in the current directory to run all the applications. 
```

> The following `dapr.yaml` example includes some of the configurations you can customize to your applications. For a more in-depth example and explanation of variables, see [Multi-app template]({{< ref multi-app-template.md >}}).

Reviewer 2: I suggest that we use the term "template properties" rather than template configuration, which can cause more configuration confusion. 

```suggestion
The following `dapr.yaml` example includes some of the template properties you can customize for your applications. For a more in-depth example and explanation of the template properties, see [Multi-app template]({{< ref multi-app-template.md >}}).
```

> 

Reviewer 2: This example below looks wrong in that an appID is missing. 
Also worth adding a sentence to say that this does. i.e. Launches 2 apps with IDs processor and emit-metrics.

```yaml
version: 1
apps:
   - appID: processor
    appDirPath: ../../../apps/processor/
    appPort: 9081
    daprHTTPPort: 3510
    command: ["go","run", "app.go"]
  - appID: emit-metrics
    appDirPath: ../../../apps/emit-metrics/
    daprHTTPPort: 3511
    env: 
      DAPR_HOST_ADD: localhost
    command: ["go","run", "app.go"]
```

> The following `dapr.yaml` example includes some of the template properties you can customize for your applications. In the example, you can simultaneously launch 2 applications with app IDs of `processor` and `emit-metrics`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example includes some of the template properties you can customize for your applications. In the example, you can simultaneously launch 2 applications with app IDs of `processor` and `emit-metrics`.
```

```yaml
version: 1
apps:
  - appID: processor

>     appDirPath: ../../../apps/processor/

Reviewer: this is just an example ... such a complex relative path is not needed 
```suggestion
    appDirPath: ../apps/processor/
```

    command: ["go","run", "app.go"]
  - appID: emit-metrics
    appDirPath: ../../../apps/emit-metrics/
    daprHTTPPort: 3511
    env: 
      DAPR_HOST_ADD: localhost
    command: ["go","run", "app.go"]
```

> ## Approaches for using Multi-app Run

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Locations for resources and configuration files
```

>     appDirPath: ../../../apps/emit-metrics/

Reviewer: same as above
```suggestion
    appDirPath: ../apps/emit-metrics/
```

> You have several options when using Multi-app Run. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You have options on where to place your applications' resources and configuration files when using Multi-app Run. 
```

> ### Point to one location (with convention)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Point to one file location (with convention)
```

> When developing multiple applications, each app directory can have a `.dapr` folder, which contains a `config.yaml` file and a `resources` directory. Otherwise, if the `.dapr` directory is not present within the app directory, the default `~/.dapr/resources/` and `~/.dapr/config.yaml` locations are used.

Reviewer 2: I would move this down to the "Separate file locations for each application" section

> You can set all of your applications and resources at the `~/.dapr` root. This is helpful when all applications share the same resources path. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can set all of your applications resources and configurations at the `~/.dapr` root. This is helpful when all applications share the same resources path, for example when testing on a local machine. 
```

> You can set all of your applications and resources at the `~/.dapr` root. This is helpful when all applications share the same resources path. 

Reviewer 2: Suggest moving this paragraph to be first after the "Point to one location (with convention)" title

> ### Point to separate locations (with convention)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
###  Separate file locations for each application (with convention)
```

### Separate file locations for each application (with convention)

> When developing multiple applications, each app directory can have a `.dapr` folder, which contains a `config.yaml` file and a `resources` directory. Otherwise, if the `.dapr` directory is not present within the app directory, the default `~/.dapr/resources/` and `~/.dapr/config.yaml` locations are used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using MapR, each application directory can have a `.dapr` folder, which contains a `config.yaml` file and a `resources` directory. Otherwise, if the `.dapr` directory is not present within the app directory, the default `~/.dapr/resources/` and `~/.dapr/config.yaml` locations are used.
```

> You can also name each app directory's `.dapr` directory something other than `.dapr`, like `mymagicapp`, `webapp`, or `backend`. This helps if you'd like to be explicit about resource or application directory paths.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also name each app directory's `.dapr` directory something other than `.dapr`, such as, `webapp`, or `backend`. This helps if you'd like to be explicit about resource or application directory paths.
```

> If you decide to add a `.dapr` directory in each app directory, with a `/resources` directory and `config.yaml` file, you can specify different resources paths for each application. This approach remains within convention by using the default `.dapr`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you decide to add a `.dapr` directory in each application directory, with a `/resources` directory and `config.yaml` file, you can specify different resources paths for each application. This approach remains within convention by using the default `~/.dapr`
```

## Logs

Logs are included by default within each app directory and are tracked in the following locations under `.dapr/logs`:

- `app.log`
- `daprd.log`

> Even if you've decided to rename your resources folder to something other than `.dapr`, the logs will remain there.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even if you've decided to rename your resources folder to something other than `.dapr`, the logs file are written to `.dapr` folder

> ### Precedence rules

Reviewer 2: What is this?

Author: Leftover header - removed

## Try it out

> 

Reviewer 2: Include a link here to the Calc tutorial app

Author: @mukundansundar Let me know when this link is ready

Author: @mukundansundar dapr/quickstarts#777

Reviewer: The issue is closed. With implementation merged to Quickstarts repo.

> Logs for application and `daprd` are captured in separate files. These log files are created automatically under `.dapr/logs` directory under each app director. These log file names follow the below pattern:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logs for application and `daprd` are captured in separate files. These log files are created automatically under `.dapr/logs` directory under each app directory (`appDirPath` in the template). These log file names follow the pattern seen below:
```

> - `<appID>_app_<timestamp>.log` (file name format for app's log)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `<appID>_app_<timestamp>.log` (file name format for `app` log)
```

> Even if you've decided to rename your resources folder to something other than `.dapr`, the logs file are written to `.dapr` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if you've decided to rename your resources folder to something other than `.dapr`, the logs file are written only to `.dapr/logs` folder(created in the app directory).
```

Watch [this video for an overview on Multi-App Run](https://youtu.be/s1p9MNl4VGo?t=2456):

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/s1p9MNl4VGo?start=2456" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

## Next steps

> [Unpack the Multi-App Run template file and its properties]({{< ref multi-app-template.md >}})

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Learn the Multi-App Run template file structure and its properties]({{< ref multi-app-template.md >}})
```

### Point to one file location (with convention)

You can set all of your applications resources and configurations at the `~/.dapr` root. This is helpful when all applications share the same resources path, like when testing on a local machine.

### Separate file locations for each application (with convention)

When developing multiple applications, each app directory can have a `.dapr` folder, which contains a `config.yaml` file and a `resources` directory. Otherwise, if the `.dapr` directory is not present within the app directory, the default `~/.dapr/resources/` and `~/.dapr/config.yaml` locations are used.

If you decide to add a `.dapr` directory in each app directory, with a `/resources` directory and `config.yaml` file, you can specify different resources paths for each application. This approach remains within convention by using the default `.dapr`

### Point to separate locations (custom)

You can also name each app directory's `.dapr` directory something other than `.dapr`, such as, `webapp`, or `backend`. This helps if you'd like to be explicit about resource or application directory paths.

## Logs

> Logs are included by default within each app directory and are tracked in the following locations under `.dapr/logs`:

Reviewer 3: Can include more details like - 
```suggestion
Logs for application and Daprd are captured in separate files. These log files are created automatically under `.dapr/logs` directory under each app director. These log file names follow below pattern:
```

- `app.log`

> - `daprd.log`

Reviewer 3: - `<appID>_app_<timestamp>.log` (file name format for app's log)
- `<appID>_daprd_<timestamp>.log` (file name format for Darpd log)
